https://teachmeanatomy.info/neuroanatomy/structures/meninges/

The meninges refer to the membranous coverings of the brain and spinal cord. There are three layers of meninges, known as the dura mater, arachnoid mater and pia mater.

These coverings have two major functions:

    Provide a supportive framework for the cerebral and cranial vasculature.

    Acting with cerebrospinal fluid to protect the CNS from mechanical damage.

The meninges are often involved cerebral pathology, as a common site of infection (meningitis), and intracranial bleeds.

In this article, we shall look at the anatomy of the three layers, and their clinical correlations.
By TeachMeSeries Ltd (2021)
Fig 1.0 - Overview of the meninges, and their relationship to the skull and brain.

Fig 1 – Overview of the meninges, and their relationship to the skull and brain.
Dura Mater

The dura mater is the outermost layer of the meninges, lying directly underneath the bones of the skull and vertebral column. It is thick, tough and inextensible.

Within the cranial cavity, the dura contains two connective tissue sheets:

    Periosteal layer – lines the inner surface of the bones of the cranium.

    Meningeal layer – deep to the periosteal layer inside the cranial cavity. It is the only layer present in the vertebral column.

Between these two layers, the dural venous sinuses are located. They are responsible for the venous vasculature of the cranium, draining into the internal jugular veins.

In some areas within the skull, the meningeal layer of the dura mater folds inwards as dural reflections. They partition the brain, and divide the cranial cavity into several compartments. For example, the tentorium cerebelli divides the cranial cavity into supratentorial and infratentorial compartments.

The dura mater receives its own blood supply – primarily from the middle meningeal artery and vein. It is innervated by the trigeminal nerve (V1, V2 and V3).
Clinical Relevance: Extradural and Subdural Haematomas

A haematoma is a collection of blood. As the cranial cavity is effectively a closed box, a haematoma can cause a rapid increase in intra-cranial pressure. Death will result if untreated.

There are two types of haematomas involving the dura mater:

    Extradural – arterial blood collects between the skull and periosteal layer of the dura. The causative vessel is usually the middle meningeal artery, tearing as a consequence of brain trauma.

    Subdural – venous blood collects between the dura and the arachnoid mater. It results from damage to cerebral veins as they empty into the dural venous sinuses.

    By TeachMeSeries Ltd (2021)
    Fig 1.1 - CT scan of a massive extradural haematoma

    Fig 2 – CT scan of a massive extradural haematoma

